Lunch meeting September 6th: Dusty, Joe, Scott, Andrew

# Cirriculum
Mostly finalized. A few edits are required:
- Pull request #1 should be accepted.
- Dusty pointed out that because of how the schedule was planned, Friday and Saturday are both required for a beginner. If they show up on Saturday only, they'll be lost. We've decided to shift a lot of the content from Friday evening to Saturday, and have it mostly be centered around workstation setup and socialization.
- Joe came up with the idea of having "challenges" to partake in on Friday evening, to act as ice-breakers. Sponsors could provide prizes to these challenge winners.
- Time should be considered (including scheduling of breaks) with next revision.
- Dusty will be performing the required edits to the schedule.

# Space
- Mike has request in for us to use Cerner's space
- Wes has offered Databasically's offices as a space, though the lack of breakout/common meeting space may be a downfall.
- Andrew will contact UMKC CS department about potentially providing a space.

# Activities 
- It would be nice to come up with some activities to have in our pockets (both for Friday evening's challenges and for breaks during the day on Saturday). 
- Node summer camp would potentially be a good resource.

# Handouts
- Speakers will be asked to develop handouts to go with their coverage of the curriculum. 
- Handouts should contain examples/tutorials to augment content.
- Scott will create the handout for Friday evening (Getting Started).

# Marketing
- To be determined are: an official name for the workshop, logos/graphics, posters to distribute to schools and around town, and a website (if needed).
- Andrew will be heading up the marketing of the workshop.
- The event will be created on EventBrite, and we'll ask somewhere around $10-15 for a ticket. The ticket price will be refunded on entering (making the event free to attend).

# Sponsors
- Joe will track down potential sponsors (and follow up with them).
- Github has sent us a schwagbox.

# TAs/helpers
- Dusty will be in charge of coordinating finding TAs to linger about the croud and answer questions.

# Teachers
- Andrew and Joe expressed interest in teaching/speaking on the content of the curriculum.
- Scott mentioned that another group had hired teachers and taught them the content, and had those hired teachers actually do the teaching.