---
layout: post
title: "3. Shell Lab"
author: NodeKC
tags:
---

# A Node Shell

### Overview

In this lab we'll put together a simple shell. We'll interact with the filesystem and learn some useful facets of the JavaScript programming language.

### Time 

1 hour

### Objectives

* The global process variable
* Filesystem operations
* Working with streams
* JavaScript practice

## Lab
Commands will be provided to our shell through the process' standard in. By default, Node does not enable standard input. So the first thing we'll do is enable standard in and echo the commands.

Create a new file called ``shell.js`` and add the following:

    var stdin = process.openStdin();

    stdin.on('data', function(input) {
        console.log(input);
    });

Before we go any further, let's experiment with what the above code does.

    node shell.js

Type anything and press enter. Notice that the input is line buffered. To shut down the process press ```CTRL+C```. The output of your response might look something like this:

    foo
    <Buffer 64>
    bar
    <Buffer 64>

Note we're printing out a ```Buffer``` object. That's because the ```input``` variable does not contain the string value of your input directly.

It's worth noting that, at this point, the buffer exists completely outside of JavaScript memory. Interacting with this buffer will move data across the native to JavaScript boundary. For example, calling ```input.toString()``` will create a new JavaScript string containing the entire contents of the Buffer. An optional encoding can be specified as the first argument of the toString function (ie ```input.toString('utf8')```). 

Since we're working with relatively short commands lets go ahead and call ```input.toString()``` on the Buffer. Now starting up the shell and typing any value will result in the expected output ending with the new line character.

The next step is to parse the input string. The commands in our simple shell will take the form:

    command [args...]

A regex can separate the arguments from the command: ```/(\w+)(.*)/```. We can then parse the argument part of this by splitting each argument by white space.

    stdin.on('data', function (input) {
        var matches = input.toString().match(/(\w+)(.*)/);
        var command = matches[1].toLowerCase();
        var args = matches[2].trim().split(/\s+/);
    });

Feel free to check out the result of this by logging out the value of ```command``` and ```args```. You may want to add a little more logic to make this resilient to malformed input. But we'll leave that excercise up to you.


## Our first command: pwd

```pwd``` is a program to print out the current working directory. Let's implement this in our shell. 

    var stdin = process.openStdin();

    var commands = {
        'pwd': function () {
            console.log(process.cwd());
        }
    };

    stdin.on('data', function (input) {
        var matches = input.toString().match(/(\w+)(.*)/);
        var command = matches[1].toLowerCase();

        commands[command]();
    });

To clarify what's happening above here's sample output of executing the regex at the Node REPL. The input is ```cmd_name arg1 arg2```. 

    > var input = "cmd_name arg1 arg2"
    'cmd_name arg1 arg2'
    > var matches = input.match(/(\w+)(.*)/)
    > matches
    [ 'cmd_name arg1 arg2',        //matches[0]
      'cmd_name',                  //matches[1]
      ' arg1 arg2',                //matches[2]
      index: 0,                    //matches[3]
      input: 'cmd_name arg1 arg2'] //matches[4]

We are accessing ```matches[1]``` because it's the first group (groups are specified with the parenthesis). If you are unfamilar with Regular Expressions a good source to learn more is at [Regular-Expressions.info](http://www.regular-expressions.info/). 

Now, jump back to your terminal and give our shell a try!

Start up the shell with Node:

    node shell.js

Execute our one and only command: 

    pwd
    /users/you/simple-shell/

## A parameterized command: ls

```ls [directory]```: prints the contents of a directory. If the directory argument is not specified it will print the contents of the current working directory.

In order to process the arguments we need to add a little more parsing logic to the input. Since we split the command from the arguments with a regex we can now parse the second half of that string. Arguments are separated by white space so a simple regex split will give us what we need. In order to ignore unecessary white space let's trim the args string first. 

#### A quick side note: 
The result of ```'some string'.split(/\s+/)``` is an array  ```['some', 'string']```. 

This example could have been done with ```'some string'.split(' ')``` but would not account for other types of white space or multiple white spaces. 

For example: ```'some__string'.split('_')``` would result in ```['some', '', 'string']``` (underscores used because multiple consecutive white spaces were ignored by Markdown parser)

    stdin.on('data', function (input) {
        var matches = input.toString().match(/(\w+)(.*)/);
        var command = matches[1].toLowerCase();
        var args = matches[2].trim().split(/\s+/); // split on white space

        commands[command](args);
    });

To implement ls add a new property to our object named 'ls' like this:

    var commands = {
        'pwd': function () {
            console.log(process.cwd());
        },
        'ls': function (args) { // New property added here. Note the comma on the previous line
            fs.readdir(args[0] || process.cwd(), function (err, entries) {
                entries.forEach(function (e) {
                    console.log(e);
                });
            });
        }
    };

Notice this part of the ls implementation: ```args[0] || process.cwd()``` 

Unlike many other languages, JavaScript doesn't care if you access an index out of bounds of an array. If an element does not exist at the index ```undefined``` will be returned. Using the ```x || y``` syntax will test the existence of ```x``` and if it doesn't exist will evaluate to ```y```. This is a common pattern for assigning a default value. 

Feel free to implement your favorite shell command as an exercise or follow along with the next part of this lab where we'll implement ```tail```.

## Implementing tail

```tail filename [N]```: prints the last N lines of a file. This requires us to locate all of the newlines in a file and trim down to last N number of lines to print. If N is not specified we'll print the last 10 lines.

Implementing this will give you exposure to file streams, getting formation about a file, and useful Array functions.

First, let's add the tail command to our commands object. After this point all examples will exclude the command object declaration.

    var commands = {
        'pwd': function () {
            console.log(process.cwd());
        },
        'ls': function (args) {
            // Implementation of ls here
        },
        'tail': function (args) {
            // Implemtation of tail here.
        };
    };

First, pull in the ```fs``` module at the top of the file just after ```var stdin = process.openStdin();```. The fs module is the node core module for file system operations.

    var fs = require('fs');

Get the length of the file in bytes. 

To do this we'll need to stat the file path provided as the first argument.

    // this is declared as a property of the commands object
    'tail': function (args) {
        var stats = fs.statSync(args[0]);

        console.log(stats);
    }

The stat object looks like this:

    { dev: 16777219,
      ino: 12794104,
      mode: 33188,
      nlink: 1,
      uid: 501,
      gid: 20,
      rdev: 0,
      size: 8066, 
      blksize: 4096,
      blocks: 16,
      atime: Sat Oct 13 2012 15:23:59 GMT-0500 (CDT),
      mtime: Sat Oct 13 2012 13:40:02 GMT-0500 (CDT),
      ctime: Sat Oct 13 2012 13:40:04 GMT-0500 (CDT) }

We're concerned with the size and blksize properties of the stat object for this exercise.

With these properties we can create a read stream that starts at the beginning of the file and continues to the end. Each ```blksize``` bytes of the file will be provided to us through a callback. Here's the implementation:

    'tail': function (args) {
        var stats = fs.statSync(args[0]);
        
        var options = { 
          flags: 'r',
          encoding: 'utf8',
          mode: 0666,
          bufferSize: stats.blksize,
          start: 0,
          end: stats.size
        };
        
        var fileStream = fs.createReadStream(args[0], options);

        fileStream.on('data', function (data) {
            //This callback (anonymous function) will be 
            //executed for every blksize (bufferSize from options) 
            //bytes of the file.
        });
    }

In our callback we'll examine each character in the buffer to see if it's a newline ```\n```. For each new line we'll track the byte offset for which it occurred in the file. 

We'll create an array to store the byte offset of each newline for the last N+1 lines. The +1 is so we can keep around an extra trailing line to start reading from.

[Algorithm Explained](https://raw.github.com/nodekc/workshop/master/labs/images/last4lines.png "An illustration of the algorithm in use.")

    var numLines = (args[1] || 10) + 1;
    var newLineOffsets = new Array(numLines);
    var offset = 0; // The offset in the file
    var index = 0;  // The array index for storing the next newline location

    fileStream.on('data', function (data) {
        for (var i = 0; i < data.length; i++) {
            if (data[i] === '\n') {
                newLineOffsets[index] = offset + i;
                index = ++index % numLines; 
            }
            offset += data.length;
        }
    });

Now, we need to add an event listener for the ```end``` event. In this callback we'll print the last N lines of the file. Add this just after the data callback.

    fileStream.on('end', function () {
        if (typeof newLineOffsets[index] === 'number') {
            var position = newLineOffsets[index] + 1;
        } 
        else {
            var position = 0;
        }
        
        var bytesToRead = stats.size - position;

        fs.open(args[0], 'r', function (err, fd) {
            var buffer = new Buffer(bytesToRead);
            fs.readSync(fd, buffer, 0, bytesToRead, position);
            console.log(buffer.toString())
        });
    });

If you're new to JavaScript you may be confused by the check to see if an element is a number. This ensures ```newLineOffsets[index]``` has been set to a number. If the value was never set it would be ```undefined```. Alternatively, this could have been:

    typeof newLineOffsets[index] !== 'undefined'

Some examples of the ```typeof``` operator:

* ```typeof 10``` => 'number' 
* ```typeof 'nodelabs'``` => 'string'
* ```typeof true``` => 'boolean'
* ```typeof null``` => null

**Important**

Another important detail about this example is that the variable declaration happens within the braces of the conditional statement. In other languages ```position``` would not be available out of the scope of the conditional block. However, in JavaScript, ```position``` is available outside of the statement block because of how scoping is handled in JavaScript. In short, JavaScript scope is at the ```function``` level. If you want to read more search for *JavaScript variable hoisting* on Google.


