---
layout: post
title: "Testing with Mocha"
author: NodeKC
tags:
---

# Testing with Mocha

As proper software craftspeople we should be writing tests to ensure the correctness of our software. That's especially true when it comes to a dynamic language like JavaScript. There are several good testing frameworks for JavaScript, but in this lab you'll be introduced to [Mocha](https://github.com/visionmedia/mocha) by running through the Bowling Kata.

## Intro to Mocha

Mocha is a very versitile testing framework with many ways to use it, but we'll focus on the bdd style interface. Groups of tests are defined by the `describe()` function while individual behaviors are defined by the `it()` method. For example:

{% highlight javascript %}
describe('my module', function() {
  before(function() {
    // Some setup
  });

  it('should do amazing things', function() {
     // Put some assertions in here
  });

  after(function() {
    // Some tear-down
  });
});
{% endhighlight %}

If you need to do some setup or tear-down before all behaviors, you can use the `before` or `after` functions respectively. Likewise, `beforeEach` and `afterEach` will perform setup or tear-down for each behavior.

## Assertions

There are some great third party assertion libraries like the [should](https://github.com/visionmedia/should.js/) fluent assertion library. However, the built in [assert](http://nodejs.org/api/assert.html) module gets the job done as well and that's what we'll show for examples.

## Setup

Create a new empty directory called `test-lab`. Inside the `test-lab` directory run `npm init`. Next, run `npm install --save-dev mocha` to install mocha as a development dependency. Finally, open the `package.json` file and update the command under `scripts.test` to `node_modules/mocha/bin/mocha --recursive`. Once all of that's done, your package.json should look sorta like this:

{% highlight javascript %}
{
  "name": "test-lab",
  "version": "0.0.0",
  "main": "index.js",
  "scripts": {
    "test": "node_modules/mocha/bin/mocha --recursive"
  },
  "repository": "",
  "author": "",
  "license": "BSD",
  "devDependencies": {
    "mocha": "~1.9.0"
  }
}
{% endhighlight %}

Now, create a folder called `test` and a file inside that called `bowling-spec.js`. If you run `npm test` at this point npm will invoke our test script, running mocha, and showing this result:

{% highlight bash %}
$ npm test

> test-lab@0.0.0 test test-lab
> node_modules/mocha/bin/mocha --recursive


  0 tests complete (0 ms)
{% endhighlight%}

## The bowling kata

In the bowling kata we'll use mocha specs to drive the creation of a module that scores a bowling game. The module should export a function called `score()` that takes in an array of numbers and returns a score as a number. Each entry in the array represents the number of pins knocked down by that throw. You can assume that all throws will be between 0 and 10 and each frame will be valid. Check this out if you need a refresher on the rules for [scoring a bowling game](http://slocums.homestead.com/gamescore.html).

Make a directory called `source` and a file inside of that called `bowling.js`. You can start with this for `source/bowling.js`:

{% highlight javascript %}
var bowling = module.export = {}

bowling.score = function (throws) {
  return 0;
}
{% endhighlight %}

And to start you off with the first passing test, `test/bowling-spec.js` will look like this:

{% highlight javascript %}
var bowling = require('../source/bowling');

describe('Bowling scorer', function () {
  it('should return 0 for a gutter game', function () {
    var score = bowling.score([0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0]);
    assert.equal(score, 0);
  });

  // More behaviors here
});
{% endhighlight %}

Now, write the rest of the behaviors and implement the remainder of the scorer for yourself. If you're feeling froggy, you could make the score function asynchronous using the [done callback](http://visionmedia.github.io/mocha/#asynchronous-code)