# Streams

Streams are one of the most amazing features of Node. However, it's not a new thing. *nix systems use I/O streams to move data from one process to another.

## Read Streams

The first stream we'll discuss is a read stream. As you might expect this stream supports only reading. Let's take a look at an example.

Start by creating a file called ```example.txt``` and add whatever contents you like. Create another file called `readable.js` and add the following:


{% highlight javascript %}
var fs = require('fs');

var rs = fs.createReadStream('./example.txt');

rs.on('data', function (data) {
   console.log(data.toString());
});

rs.on('end', function () {
   console.log('end');
});
{% endhighlight %}

Now that we've used a readable stream let's write our own.

{% highlight javascript %}
var Readable = require('stream').Readable;
var util = require('util');
util.inherits(TeamStream, Readable);

function TeamStream () {
    Readable.call(this);
    var best_sports_programs = ['K-State Football', 'K-State Basketball', 'K-State Baseball'];
    var i = 0;
    this._read = function () {
        var program = best_sports_programs[i++];
        this.push(program || null);
    }
};

var rs = new TeamStream();
var received = 0;

rs.on('data', function (data) {
    received++;

    console.log(data.toString());

    if (received == 1) {
        console.log('pausing for some time');
        rs.pause();
        setTimeout(function () { rs.resume(); }, 3000);
    }
});

rs.on('end', function () {
    console.log('ended');
});
{% endhighlight %}


We get to learn a few different things in this example. First, we create a new readable stream. The `MyStream` function is inheriting the prototype from Node core's `ReadableStream` and in its constructor calls the `ReadableStream` constructor. We must call the constructor of the core implementation in order to perform the necessary initialization of our stream. We are required to implement the internal method `_read` which is called on every read request. In this example the first read request is issued whenever we subscribe to the `'data'` event. There are other ways to do this which we'll cover next.

You'll notice in this example that we are able to control the flow of data from a readable stream through `pause` and `resume`. This is incredibly important to allow your application to keep up with incoming data and only receive data when needed.

The above example reads data by the buffer. However, we have more fine grained control over how much data we receive through the `read` method. The next example will give you an idea of the series of events that occurs when reading from a stream that can provide data at various times. This is exactly the situation when dealing with network connections. Feel free to copy and paste this snippet. Study the output and understand the chain of events before moving on.

{% highlight javascript %}
var Readable = require('stream').Readable;
var util = require('util');

var log =  (function () {
    var startTime = new Date().getTime();

    return function (msg) {
        var now = new Date().getTime();
        console.log('+' + Math.floor((now - startTime) / 1000) + ' ' + msg);
    };
})();

util.inherits(LetterStream, Readable);

function LetterStream () {
    Readable.call(this);
    var letters = ['aaaaaa', 'bbbbbb', 'cccccc', 'dddddd'];

    var i = 0;
    this._read = function () {
        log('Internal read called.');
        var letter = letters[i++];
        if (i > 1) {
            var that = this;
            setTimeout(function () {
                log('Pushing data async.');
                that.push(letter);
            }, 2000);
        }
        else
        {
            log('Pushing data.');
            this.push(letter || null);
        }
    };
};

var rs = new LetterStream();

rs.on('end', function () {
    log('End');
});

rs.on('readable', function () {
    log('Stream is readable');

    var c;
    while (c = rs.read(2))
    {
        log(c.toString());
    }

    log('Reached end of readable data available');
});

log('Reached end of program. It\'s now alive because of async callbacks pending.');
{% endhighlight %}

We've successfully read 2 bytes from our underlying stream with each iteration of the loop. Despite the number of calls to `read` we only invoke our internal function when new data is actually needed.

## Write Stream



Flow Control

Piping

Duplex Stream

Transform Stream
